Git & GitHub Learning Summary – Week 4 (DevOps Journey)
Author: Harsh Rajput

Overview
This week I focused on learning Git and GitHub, which are essential tools for version control and collaborative software development. Git helps track changes in source code, while GitHub provides a platform to host repositories and collaborate with other developers.

Key Concepts Learned

1. Version Control
Version control allows developers to track and manage changes in code over time. It helps teams collaborate efficiently and revert to previous versions if needed.

2. Git Repository
A repository is a project folder where Git tracks all files and their changes.

3. Local vs Remote Repository
Local Repository: Stored on the developer’s machine.
Remote Repository: Hosted on platforms like GitHub for collaboration.

Git Commands Practiced

git init
Used to initialize a new Git repository.

git clone <repository_url>
Used to download a remote repository to the local machine.

git status
Shows the current state of files in the working directory.

git add .
Adds all changes to the staging area.

git commit -m "message"
Saves the changes to the repository with a message describing the update.

git branch
Displays all available branches.

git checkout <branch_name>
Switches between branches.

git checkout -b <branch_name>
Creates and switches to a new branch.

git merge <branch_name>
Merges changes from one branch into another.

git push origin main
Uploads local commits to the remote repository.

git pull origin main
Downloads and merges changes from the remote repository.

Branching Strategy Importance

1. Isolating Features and Bug Fixes
Branches allow developers to work on new features or bug fixes without affecting the main branch.

2. Parallel Development
Multiple developers can work on different features simultaneously using separate branches.

3. Reducing Merge Conflicts
Using structured branching helps reduce conflicts when integrating code.

4. Code Reviews with Pull Requests
Pull Requests allow teams to review code before merging it into the main branch, improving code quality.

What I Achieved This Week

- Learned core Git commands
- Practiced repository management
- Understood branching strategies
- Uploaded practice code to GitHub

